# Solar Activity is Responsible for Increasing Global Temperatures, NOT Humans

### Source:
Whitehouse, D., 2004. Sunspots reaching 1,000-year high. BBC News. [online] 6 Jul. Available at: <http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/3869753.stm> [Accessed 14 Feb. 2021].

## Article Summary
This article discusses the increasing activity of the Sun in the last 1000 years. It begins with an update on scientific evidence collected from Greenland Ice Cores by scientists from the Institute for Astronomy in Zurich. The scientists who performed this analysis looked at concentrations of a particular beryllium isotope within the cores created by cosmic rays reaching the Earth’s surface. Cosmic rays are in turn influenced by the strength of the solar wind, which itself varies with the sunspot cycle. The scientists involved reported that over the last century, the number of sunspots rose at the same time that the Earth’s climate became progressively warmer. Dr. Whitehouse, the author and a science editor for BBC, proceeds to discuss historical monitoring of sunspot numbers, which appear to fluctuate in 11-year cycles and change the Sun’s activity. He discusses the “Little Ice Age”, a prolonged cold weather event that occurred between 1645 and 1715 and which coincided with the observation of fewer sunspots during this time. The article concludes with a discussion of the striking increase in solar activity over the past 1,150 years, and especially that present in the last 60 years. This increase in solar activity is said to have had a considerable indirect influence on the global climate in the past, although anthropogenic emissions are “amplifying the Sun’s latest attempt to warm the Earth”.

## Tactical Persuasion and Climate Claims
The most prominent feature of this article is how subtle its stance on the influence of solar activity is. Being published in the BBC, it is unlikely that blatant climate change skepticism could be included in the piece and leaves one wondering if this was even an attempt at changing readers’ perceptions. The author has a doctorate, although his field is not mentioned, enforcing the reliability ingrained in a BBC publication. Furthermore, a lack of information makes the reader question the true impact of CO2 emissions on warming climates, rather than an outright claim to the contrary. There is no mention of how much the climate cooled during the “Little Ice Age”, the expected quantitative impact that the latest warming has/will have on Earth’s temperature, nor how quickly historical climate changes occurred. A “considerable indirect impact” implies a small role for anthropogenic effects. Notably, the article does mention the amplification of temperature increases caused by CO2 emissions, just enough to assure the reader that there is no climate change denial happening. This is an effective persuasion tactic and in social psychology, the argument falls in what is known as the “Latitude of Noncommitment”: the argument is far enough from both extremes that it inspires attitude change but is not too far from either point of view that it is too far to be accepted (Mallard, 2010). For climate change skeptics, the claim appears to reinforce pre-existing beliefs that climate change hysteria is misattributed to anthropogenic causes. For readers who believe in man-made climate change, the article acknowledges the impact of humans but implies lessened blame due to solar changes. 

## What Science Has to Say
Evidence suggests that changes in solar activity between 1880 and 1980 have accounted for an increase of approximately 0.1℃ (Engels & Geel, 2012; Stauning, 2013). In contrast, anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions account for 0.7℃ of the observed increase since 1970, a period during which the amount of solar radiation reaching Earth has declined (Laut, 2003; Stauning, 2013). Similarly, Earth’s upper atmosphere cooled while its lower atmosphere has been warming, providing further evidence that the primary culprit is GHG emissions rather than the Sun (Laut, 2003; Stauning, 2013; Solomon et al., 2019). Additionally, the article fails to mention that sunspot measurements have not been used since the late 1970s when satellites began collecting more accurate information on TSI (Muñoz-Jaramillo & Vaquero, 2019). The “Little Ice Age” is often cited to deny that climate change is manmade and emphasize natural fluctuations in Earth’s climate, but the article ignores rates at which natural changes in climate occurred; these are infinitely slower than the rate of temperature increase observed in the last 60 years (Engels & Geel, 2012; Stauning, 2013; Muñoz-Jaramillo & Vaquero, 2019; Solomon et al., 2019). Conclusively, while the influence of solar activity is a valid consideration, evidence points to a minimal influence of solar changes on increasing temperatures observed—one that is misrepresented in the article.

### References
Engels, S. and Geel, B. van, 2012. The effects of changing solar activity on climate: contributions from palaeoclimatological studies. Journal of Space Weather and Space Climate, 2, p.A09.

Laut, P., 2003. Solar activity and terrestrial climate: an analysis of some purported correlations. Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics, 65(7), pp.801–812.

Mallard, J., 2010. Engaging students in Social Judgment Theory. Communication Teacher, 24(4), pp.197–202.

Muñoz-Jaramillo, A. and Vaquero, J.M., 2019. Visualization of the challenges and limitations of the long-term sunspot number record. Nature Astronomy, 3(3), pp.205–211.

Solomon, S.C., Liu, H.-L., Marsh, D.R., McInerney, J.M., Qian, L. and Vitt, F.M., 2019. Whole Atmosphere Climate Change: Dependence on Solar Activity. Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics, 124(5), pp.3799–3809.

Stauning, P., 2013. Reduced Solar Activity Disguises Global Temperature Rise. Atmospheric and Climate Sciences, [online] 2014. Available at: <http://www.scirp.org/journal/PaperInformation.aspx?PaperID=41752> [Accessed 16 Feb. 2021].

